of obstruction. So the thing is that it sends a lot of beams simultaneously. Depending upon how good your lidar is. And according to that, you get the depth. So this is a really fast system. Optical system optical systems are always really fast because light is a very fast thing. So optical systems are always really fast. Lidar will generally use in our automotives for doing this automotive vehicles and all those things. Hello? Sir. Yes. Can you hear me? Yeah, yeah. Sir, I'm not clear with the IMU's different axes that you explained like, uh, you said some IMU's will have nine, some will have six. What were what were those? I said that there is one I am very common IMU known as MPU6050, okay. I told you that there is an IMU MPU6050. It will be six axis. 6° of freedom, right? Then I also told you that an IMU generally contains three things. Accelerometer, gyroscope, magnetometer, right? So what happens is generally I told you that it can either measure X Y or Z, right? X Y or it can measure roll, pitch, yaw. The three axes of this the three axes of this. Total is six axes. Right? And when your IMU has magnetometer also inside that, which measures the orientation of your device with the magnetic field of the earth then it's totally nine axes. Sir, uh, along X and Y-axis like axes, will consider it's a translation motion and along uh, roll, pitch and yaw, it's rotation motion, Yeah. The other along along the other three, we will consider it's uh, rotating rotational motion, right? Yeah. Okay. What happens is, you are going from X to Y. Uh, for example, I'll take this example that I want to move in X-axis, right? How will I know that where I have reached? So what happens is, the IMU knows its position, measures its position. Then what happens is, the speed which you take with which you take it, it takes the acceleration, right? And using that acceleration it finds its next position. So that is what accelerometer is. Measure basically acceleration. And with that acceleration, you can see how much translation I've moved. That is why in your phones also you have this speedometer, right? What happens is, you have IMU inside your phone and it can measure your steps. How is it measuring your steps? It's just seeing how far you have translated using that phenomenon. Okay? Okay, sir. Sir, also, there is a Hmm. Your voice is been fluctuating like, sometimes I'm getting low voice and sometimes it was Okay. Okay, okay, okay. So, we have a simulator. It's known as V-REP. Right? No, it's not. We have a simulator that has V-REP. Here we have different sensors that we can just, you know, simulate. Right? So, we have IMUs here as well. Okay? So, let me open one sample project. Actually, this was the one that we were about to do next, but okay. Like, I'll tell, I have my demo here. Right? Here we have bunch of sensors here. We have MPU6050 also, okay? So, here we can do because it will be it will get too much theoretical. So we'll do this also. That we'll take this virtual sensor. We'll connect it to the I2Cs. So, what is I2C? That I will show you tomorrow. That's why I told you that generally I take this thing before, but yeah, sensor was also important. So, what is I2C? What is the programming part? That I will take tomorrow. Today I will talk about the sensors. Okay? So that tomorrow when I input these sensors, you can know that what these sensors are doing. Okay? You don't have any question regarding the sensor part. Okay? So, we'll do simulation. along with the communication protocol tomorrow. Right? Any doubts? Hello. Hello? Yes, sir. Any doubts? Hmm. You get whatever is the flow of the module that we are just having, you know? Or is there any doubt with it? No, sir. No, sir, no doubt. Okay. Yes, someone was asking something? Okay. So, next will be encoder. Okay? So, do you have a motor? Imagine you have a motor, right? How does the motor knows that where the shaft is of the motor, like where is it, the shaft? How will the motor know? There shall be some feedback system, right? So, how many of you have studied control systems? No, sir, next semester, not yet. Yes, sir. Hall sensors are used to know the rotation. Where it is. Hall sensors are used for rotation, but we have some other sensors also. It is known as encoders, right? So, I'll tell you how does it works. Hall effect is also used. It's Hall effect is basically a phenomenon, right? So, encoders are also one type of sensors that are based on the Hall effect only. But there are other technologies also around the encoders. Right? We'll discuss about that also. But I would like to know how many of you have have studied control systems? Sir, I guess it's in the third year of electronics and communication. Yeah, third year. And I know only because it will be right after. Nilay, Nilay has studied control system, right? Yes, sir. Okay. So, all of us are pretty young here, right? Excluding me. I'm also young, don't worry. So, yeah, control systems. Right? Okay. So, first of all, let's talk about control system, then you will get the concept of encoder. Right? Let's suppose we have a system. We have an input. The system is giving some output. Right? I say I have given X amount of voltage. Now, let's suppose this is a motor M. I'm getting a Y amount of rotation in RPMs. Okay? Now, the motor has moved from this place to this. The shaft has moved here. Right? So, by some theta. Okay? Now, I want to know where the system is. Right now, it is in open loop configuration. Open loop Okay? But now it doesn't know where the feedback is. So, where the So, what we do is, we take the input. We take the feedback. FB, not the Facebook. And we generally feed it to the input. Right? So, what happens in this case is, now the input knows where your feedback, where your shaft is, or where your motor position is. Now, what happens is, accordingly it will give some X voltage. And then, it will tell, okay, my output should be Y RPMs. So, until and unless this Y RPM is not reached, it will keep on giving some sort of a feedback. And this loop will work like this. And that is called a closed-loop system. Right? You're getting me? Now, there shall be some kind of a sensor in my output which is taking in the data and which is feeding it to the input. Right? No, not this arrow, this is wrong. Right? So, this sensor is in the case of motor is encoder. It gives the position of the motor shaft in the real time. Okay? So, let us see if V-REP has some encoders with them. Rotary encoder, see. It has the rotary encoder. So, what we'll do is, so all these sensors, I'll give you for this for some homework as well. What we do is, we'll connect these things and we'll see, okay, how much uh, basically, the output we are getting, okay, and all those things. So, we'll do all those sensors as well, okay? So, some of you some of them I'll give for homework. But first of all, I'll just teach you some bit programming, then after only I'll give you the homework for the sensors, then you guys have to interface it and then you have to show the output. And then you cannot make excuses as well because everything is available on the web. So, you don't have to buy anything, you don't have to do anything. Just have to interface them and just code them. That will be fine. Right? So that will be it. But before that, we'll study some communication protocols, UART, UART, I2C, SPI and then after that, we'll just go for the programming part. Okay? And yes, I was installing actually I was installing Altium Designer. So, I was not getting the license for it. I was just thinking of showing you PCB designing on this as well. Actually, this is the industry standard PCB designing tool. So, I was just having some problem with the licenses. I was sorting it. So, that's why I wanted to show you this. So, this is the one, okay, we'll work on EasyEDA that I told you. EasyEDA. Right? We'll work on EasyEDA. So, this is the one we'll work on. But then, this is a really hobbyist kind of a thing. Okay? This EasyEDA. I wanted to show you something that the industry follows. So that whenever you make some sort of a PCB or, you know, whenever you write something on your resume, it will reflect that you already have worked on the industry industrial-grade softwares, right? For designing or for prototyping, whatever it is. Right? So, this software, Altium, will give a very good impression on your resumes. So, I'll just show you some bit of it. Not mainly I'll do EasyEDA for the sake of the course. I'll do EasyEDA, but I will show you I'll make some basic kind of a PCB over here and I'll show you some of the features of the Altium that you can explore. Right? Definitely we'll use Arduino Studios, but yeah, I also installed this STM32CubeIDE for STM microcontrollers. So, we'll see STMs also. Okay? Fine, everyone? Yes, sir. For the course, we don't have any obligation to do all these these two softwares. But yeah, this is something that the industry demands nowadays. Right? So, you cannot do it. Like I wanted to give you some introduction regarding it. Right? So, that is it. Now, we are moving on. Yeah. Encoders. So, did you get what an encoder is? Now, next we have ultrasonics or IR sensors. Okay? What happens is, so, IR and ultrasonic works on the same phenomenon. Phenomenon is same, but the medium is different. One uses sound, another uses light. So, what happens is, let's suppose this is an ultrasound transmitter, right? What happens is, it it transmits the sound waves. Right? It it gets stuck to something and then it bounces back. Then there is a receiver. Right? The receiver receives it, this transmitter transmit it TX. The receiver receives it. Now, we know that the speed of the sound on in the air is around 330 m/s. So, can we use the math and can we find what is the distance traveled? Distance is equals to what? Speed What is distance? into time. Divide by time, yeah. So, we can find out the time taken for this pulse to return back. Right? We'll get the T. And we know the speed of the medium. Then we can find out the distance. Right? So, in this way, we can find out what is the distance between the sensor ultrasonic sensor and the obstruction that is we are getting. Right? So, that is how we make use of this ultrasound to detect some sort of a thing. And yeah, we generally divide it by two because time is twice. Right? Distance traveled is twice. Because the wave went and wave came. So, the distance traveled is twice. So, we generally divide by two so that we get like the displacement basically, not the total distance traveled by the wave. Fine? Same is with the IR. There is IR transmitter, IR receiver. So, whenever it sees a trans um, it sees something an obstruction, generally what happens is, this IR reflects back. And when it reflects back, it says, okay, now it has been reflected. There is some obstruction ahead. Okay? So, ultrasounds are generally used for distance measurements and IR is used for like obstruction detection. Right? So, these are something some typical examples of it. Fine, everyone? Sir. Okay. Yeah. IR sensors are also used in that line following robots and all that. So it is used for current. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Now, these are some really really interesting kind of a thing. So, we have different techniques to measure actually the differences. And I have especially work worked in like these all except for the phase like personally in my you know, professional life. Like professionally I have worked on these things. Not the one the phase shift ones. Phase shift one I'll be working on. I'll be working on it. But these three, the ultrasound method, the TOF method, and the triangulation triangulation method. I have worked on these things. So, I can definitely, you know, very much guide you on these things. These are different techniques. Right? So, the time of flight is something that I told you. Right? You measure the time signals. The signal went and it came back. Right? So, the TOF is generally used in the lidar that we discussed. Second one is the triangulation method. Right? Triangulation method means you have these sensors. Right? Let's suppose you have these sensors. You know how GPS works? Anyone? Anyone knows any idea how GPS works? No one? You can raise hands. You don't have to explain it. I guess uh, it pings our location from nearby towers and with enough towers, no, we'll get our general location. GPS GPS works only works in sat. No, tower, come on. Yeah. tell me, how does it work? Uh, it like detects the exact coordinates of the user like the latitude longitude. How? How? How? Uh, maybe using the signals from satellite. No. So, using the triangulation method. So, obviously, since I told you that triangulation is definitely, I'll say triangulation only here. Sir, does it use light waves to like determine where we are like, since your opak, it sees a disturbance and then. We have a lot of electromagnetic waves, EM waves. Okay. We need the method of. I don't want the technology of. No, it it uh it transmits the signal and it detects like how much time it is taking. Fine, fine, fine, fine. It it's TOF method. Right? But how how it is giving you a very precise location because the curvature of the earth is like, it's not Earth is curved, right? So, how it is giving you a precise location? You cannot get a precise location of anything just by one sensor. Right? Can you No, right? You need at least two coordinates. Excuse me, sir. Oh. Sir, I have worked on GPS previously. I think to give you the most precise location, it should connect to eight or nine satellites at a time. And it by for the most precise ones. Yes, sir. For the most precise ones, the more are the many of them. There is no limit to it. The more number of satellites is, the more precise it is. But what is the bare minimum? How much is the bare minimum? Sir, I think it should be three or four. Three or four. Uh, it should be because I don't want I want figure. Uh, okay, sir. Sir, uh, only three or four cannot achieve the this precise location. I guess more than uh, more than 20 or something near, uh, 40, 40. Technology is very advanced, bro. Only four satellites will work. Those four satellites can give you your altitude, the X-axis, the Y-axis, the Z-axis. Okay? Technology is really really really advanced. You don't need 20 satellites. You only need four satellites. If you do it three satellites, you will get only 2D. That is what math is. Right? If you want to get X-axis, you want one satellite. Now I'll tell you how. How? Okay? This is how the triangulation method works. This is how your GPS works. This is how your your local positioning system works. Okay? What happens is, you have one person here. Right? This sends some data. It will receive it. This satellite will send some data. It will receive it. All these have D's with them. Right? This satellite will send the data. It will receive it. Now, what happens is, have you ever heard about distance formula? Under root X - X0 whole square. Plus something, something, something, something. Have you heard about that? Yes, sir. So, you have the D's of everything. You have the satellite's own coordinates. Can you find the X of this? You have three equations, three unknowns. Can you find the coordinates? Yeah, in simple math, right? Yes, sir. By getting distance. All the three. This is how your GPS generally works. And if you have one more satellite, then I generally can add X, Y, Z coordinates. Okay? You have three equations, three unknowns. Then you have the all the coordinates that you need. So, this is called the triangulation method. And this is how you precisely measure all the coordinates of anything. Although you need more number of sensors for this. But yeah, you can work it like that. Okay? Sound sound interesting. Right? It Was it interesting? Like it was very fascinating when I just heard about it for the first time. Sometimes like many years ago. No, it's not interesting? Someone can give me a second, uh, saying that. Yes, I'll switch. That is kind of like that is kind of like an answer. Like you guys can say it. It's it's interesting or not. If it's not interesting, then you can always say that. Keeping silent would be much awkward for me here. It will be embarrassing for me. I thought I thought this concept will very much zing. And I'm not getting any response like no response. It is really embarrassing for me. Was it not interesting? Sir, it was interesting. Was it? Sir, people actually respond in the chat section many times. Now, on this guy was taunting me, I guess. It's fine. But yeah, you can open your mic. You know, it is very nice to hear the compliments from mic. Right? Okay. So, this is how your GPS works. This is how your everything works. So, one more thing here. You know which clock is used in your satellites? Yes. Do you know which clock is used in your satellites? It's an atomic clock. And why an atomic clock? It's basically a cesium clock. And I have been to the place where they have kept the standard of the clock. Cesium clock. It is called NPL. It is a CSIR lab. It's called National Physical Laboratory. It's here in Delhi. We were working with them for some measurements or some experiments. So I've been to the facility where they have kept all the standards for weights, for ultrasounds, for the clocks, which basically defines one second. What is a second? So the cesium clock So, read these things like what are standards. Okay? What is one second? How do you know that one second is there? Sir, sir it is related to something oscillation, like frequencies. Sir, uh, it's basically, uh, how much, how many times an atom vibrates or something like that? Yeah. So, that is how they just take a note of a second. That is why cesium clocks are used. If the time is shifted by few milliseconds as well, right? So, it will cause a very much like it will cause approximations to your system will fail basically. You are walking at some point. Your car is walking at some point. GPS is showing that it's 10 m ahead, 10 m behind. It can collide with some other other objects also. Right? It doesn't know its own location or any other position system. So, that is how accurate timing is really important. Okay? I'll take a one-minute break. My throat is really dry, so I'll have some water. Okay? Let's continue. Okay. So, now the topics for the next session would be sensors. Um, it's sensors, sensor interfacing. and communication protocol. Sensors and what, sir? Sorry. Sensor interfacing and communication protocol. Okay, sir, thank you. Tomorrow we'll start probably on time because I'll have everything set up. Okay? So, moving on. Okay. So, is there any doubt till now? No, sir. Okay. Yesterday I taught you this duty cycle concept, right? I've told you that I'll teach it again. So, how many of you get this duty cycle concept? Can you repeat? Did you get the concept of duty cycle? It's really important for your motor control, duty cycle concept. Right? And if you want to make bug boost converter as well, then it is really important. So, that is why I must make sure that you get all these concepts. Right? So, how many of you have got the duty cycle concept? And if you want to repeat this, I can repeat this. If you want to skip it, I can skip it. But you should be really clear with this. Right? Sir, you can like go through it once. Okay, I'll go through it. What happens is we have a modulation technique known as pulse pulse width modulation. Right? What happens in the PWM? We modulate the width of the pulse. Right? For example, this is a digital pulse. We can increase or decrease the width of the pulse depending upon how much power we need. Right? Now, let me do this. Let us see. Let us suppose we have two voltage levels. One is zero. It's five. Right? Zero volts. If my wave is like this, it will be a 5-volt signal. Right? Sir, we can't see. Oh my God. Sorry for that. We'll paint again. Let me just share my screen again. So, let us see, we have two voltage levels. Actually, that is it. So, we have a modulation technique which is known as pulse pulse width modulation, okay? Let's suppose we have a digital signal like this. What I can do is, I can either decrease the width of this pulse or I can increase the width of this pulse. Right? You'll ask me that sir what is application of this? Why will we just increasing or decreasing? Yeah, basically, just duty cycle. Duty cycle refers to the total on-time of the pulse upon the total time of the pulse, okay? Let's suppose we have a pulse like this, which was on for 0.5 right? 0.5 second. And the total time of this pulse was Right? One second. So, the duty cycle of this would be 0.5 / 1, which is around 50%. Right? Now, let's suppose it was on for 0.75 seconds. And the total was one second. Its duty cycle will be how much? 0.75, okay? Now, let's suppose for now, if the wave is on for the entire time, what will be the duty cycle? 100%. Right? Getting till now? Now, let's suppose the wave is oscillating between 0 and 5 volts. 0 and 5 volts. So, what will happen is, the duty cycle will directly impact what is the voltage you know what is the average voltage of this entire pulse. So, the formula is the V average equals to duty cycle DC times peak voltage V. Right? So, if let's suppose the peak voltage is 5 volts and the duty cycle is how much? 0.75. So, how much is it will be 0.75, right? 0.75 * 5 is 3.75, or how much? Come on, guys, you can just answer. I'm not here for a one-way communication. So, it will be 3.75, right? So, that means by changing the width a pulse gives, I got 3.75 volts. Right? So, this concept can be used in motors. Why? Because motors have different torque and different speeds and different voltages. Right? If you give higher voltage, you get higher speed. This is a DC motor here. If you give the lower voltage, it will have lower speeds. Right? So, that is how you can make a variable kind of a variable voltage drive using PWM. You can control its speed using PWM. Right? Or you can control any And what is the beauty of this? That this PWM is behaving like analog even if it is coming out of some microcontrollers, which is at the digital level. Right? Yes, sir. So, this is the beauty of PWM. Right? This is how all the PWM concept is. And now, see here. Let us see. We have a variable duty cycle. Right? Here we have the duty cycle is somewhere around 50%. Here the duty cycle is around 90%. Here the duty cycle is around this. So, what happens is, if I give multiple of these, I can make basically a sine wave. Right? And this is how ladies and gentlemen, you make VFDs. Variable frequency drives. Okay? This PWM is the biggest thing. It is switching so fast, it is switching so fast that it is basically replicating as a sine wave. Right? Yes, sir. Any doubt with it? This we'll see in our upcoming classes. You don't have to worry about what this is, how this is happening, but I'm saying see the beauty of the controllers that even though it is a digital device, it is giving you a really really really good. This is just for the demonstration purposes. In the microcontroller, the microcontroller switches at around, you know, the speed of KHz, MHz. So, this waveform the most steps it has, the more smoother it is. Right? This is how you just get a very smooth kind of a PWM to work for you. And just run the motors or variables. Okay? Now, where can you use it? You can use it in the industrial robots, initially, you know, this spotlight robots. So, for the joints, right? You can use the servo motors. Okay? And DC motors for the actuations. Okay? So, these are all the PWM controlled motors as well. So, if you use a very high precision PWM. Literally, you know, someone asked me which controller shall I use for motor drives? I told him that use D-series. Why? Because it gives a really nice kind of a timer. It can give a really nice precise. The much precise timers will give you a very stable kind of a motor. Okay? That is why we Right. Yeah. College will teach you good things, good theoretical things as well. Yeah, all these things do by yourself. I don't I cannot share the PDF, you have to ask them for do you have student ID? Oh, no, sir. Yeah, I have a college student ID. Yeah, I am a student. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. you have college student ID. I will give you the license for one year. Okay. So coming back to the question. I have one ADC which is for ₹4,500. It's a small chip. So, this expensive much more expensive than your processors that you generally mean. Okay. What happens is, the component is really expensive. If there is some ESD, the whole 4500 will be gone. So, is it not good to just take precautions and save my IC from the ESD? Yes, sir. So, I asked this question was because uh, my friend was working on this uh IMU sensors for like tracking the magnetic field of the earth. So, whenever he tried to program it, the IMU sensor would get spoiled. So, he used two IMU sensors, but those two also got spoiled. So, I said like that might be the reason of ESD. Right? That is the reason of ESD and there is one thing also. What happens is, there might be the problem of the USB port also. Yeah, you have to get it checked. Okay. ESD is a big problem. Especially if you are in an area where the earthing is not there. It's a really big problem. Okay. Thank you, sir. Yeah. Anything else? Thank you. Can we end this session now? Is the work flow and EasyEDA and Altium different? Pretty different, pretty different. Altium has a lot of features, lot of features. I'll I would suggest you to go with EasyEDA first. Altium will make you mad initially. So, first learn some basic routing and all those things, then go to Altium. But then, going to industry, Altium is the best choice. Everything is right. They use Cadence, they use Altium. Yeah, these two. Really cool. Yeah, any more doubts guys? I guess we can end the topic and the session. Right? Have a good evening guys. See you tomorrow.